src/README.md, before:

# CIRED Chatbot Architecture Overviewb

This README provides a code architecture overview of the chatbot system being developed for CIRED. A more detailed description is available in the document `docs/blueprints.md`.

## Main Objectives

The chatbot enables users to pose natural-language queries and obtain accurate, citation-supported answers from CIRED’s research corpus. Multiple Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) engines, such as R2R, Morphik, and PaperQA, will be integrated and evaluated side-by-side. The architecture emphasizes openness and reproducibility by sharing all code publicly. User privacy and compliance with GDPR standards will be rigorously maintained. Data-driven performance metrics will guide continuous improvement of the system.

## Where you are in the project

```text
CIRED.digital/
└── cired.digital/
    ├── data/               # Raw and processed research documents
    ├── docs/               # Technical documentation and guidelines
    ├── reports/            # Analytical outputs
    ├── src/                # Application source code **YOU ARE HERE**
    │   ├── analytics/         # Performance and user metrics
    │   ├── data_preparation/  # Data retrieval and preparation
    │   ├── engine/            # Scripts to manage the backend (R2R)
    │   └── frontend/          # Frontend chatbot user interface (Single page app)
    └── tests/              # Automated tests, mirroring the src/ directory structure
```
> Note: The cired.digital/ repository is a subdirectory of the top-level CIRED.digital/ project directory, not versionned. The tests/ directory inside cired.digital/ mirrors the structure of src/ to facilitate targeted and modular testing.

## Source Code Organization (`src/`)

The `src/` directory is organized into specific subdirectories: `ingestion/`, `storage/`, `rag_engines/`, `api/`, `frontend/`, `analytics/`, `libs/`, and `orchestration/`.

### Data Preparation (`data_preparation/`)

The ingestion pipeline retrieves research papers from the HAL database, processes them, and segments the content for indexing and storage.

### RAG Engines (`rag_engines/`)

The system integrates multiple RAG engines using a standardized interface, allowing efficient performance comparisons.

### Backend API Service (`api/`)

The API manages incoming user queries, interacts with RAG engines for response retrieval, and coordinates system communication.

### Frontend Interface (`frontend/`)

A Next.js and React-based interactive chat interface enables real-time querying, user feedback, and side-by-side comparison of different engines.

### Analytics (`analytics/`)

Costs, performance and user satisfaction are tracked via clearly defined metrics, guiding future enhancements.

### Workflow Automation (`orchestration/`)

Routine processes, including data updates, testing, and reporting, are automated to streamline operations.

## Testing Strategy

Automated tests verify functionality across ingestion, storage, RAG integration, frontend interactions, and API responses, ensuring robustness and reliability.

## Operational and Ethical Guidelines

The project strictly adheres to GDPR, promotes transparency, and maintains comprehensive documentation. Operational costs are closely monitored.

## Sensitive Information Handling

Credentials and sensitive data are stored securely, separate from the project repository, ensuring confidentiality and security.

Commit message:

Drop observability stack workaround, temporarily fixed upsteam. (#56)
* Use full path for CONFIG_UPSTREAM_DIR

* Sync README with folders organisation.

* Remove the observability stack bug workaround, fixed upstream #2168

src/README.md, after:

# CIRED Chatbot Architecture Overviewb

This README provides a code architecture overview of the chatbot system being developed for CIRED. A more detailed description is available in the document `docs/blueprints.md`.

## Main Objectives

The chatbot enables users to pose natural-language queries and obtain accurate, citation-supported answers from CIRED’s research corpus. Multiple Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) engines, such as R2R, Morphik, and PaperQA, will be integrated and evaluated side-by-side. The architecture emphasizes openness and reproducibility by sharing all code publicly. User privacy and compliance with GDPR standards will be rigorously maintained. Data-driven performance metrics will guide continuous improvement of the system.

## Where you are in the project

```text
CIRED.digital/
└── cired.digital/
    ├── data/               # Raw and processed research documents
    ├── docs/               # Technical documentation and guidelines
    ├── reports/            # Analytical outputs
    ├── src/                # Application source code **YOU ARE HERE**
    │   ├── analytics/         # Performance and user metrics
    │   ├── intake/            # Data retrieval and preparation
    │   ├── engine/            # Scripts to manage the backend (R2R)
    │   └── frontend/          # Frontend chatbot user interface (Single page app)
    └── tests/              # Automated tests, mirroring the src/ directory structure
```
> Note: The cired.digital/ repository is a subdirectory of the top-level CIRED.digital/ project directory, not versionned. The tests/ directory inside cired.digital/ mirrors the structure of src/ to facilitate targeted and modular testing.

## Source Code Organization (`src/`)

The `src/` directory is organized into specific subdirectories: `intake/`, `engine/`, `frontend/`, and `analytics/`.

### Data Preparation (`intake/`)

The ingestion pipeline retrieves the catalog of CIRED publications from the HAL database (there is need to filter out some records unrelated to CIRED), download the PDF files, processes them (currently, we plan to just compress oversized files), and push them to the RAG engine.

### Frontend Interface (`frontend/`)

A standalone web page interactive chat interface. Enables real-time querying. Planned: user feedback, and side-by-side comparison of different engines.

### Analytics (`analytics/`)

Planned: Costs, performance and user satisfaction are tracked via clearly defined metrics, guiding future enhancements.

### RAG engine (`engine/`)

The docker configuration files and scripts to manage the R2R stack.

## Testing Strategy

Planned: Automated tests verify functionality across ingestion, storage, RAG integration, frontend interactions, and API responses, ensuring robustness and reliability.

## Operational and Ethical Guidelines

The project strictly adheres to GDPR, promotes transparency, and maintains comprehensive documentation. Operational costs are closely monitored.

## Sensitive Information Handling

Credentials and sensitive data are stored securely, separate from the project repository, ensuring confidentiality and security.
